post/2024/on-steam-power.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "On Steam Power"
description: "And why doomerism gets us nowhere."
published_at: Tue Sep 24 00:35:36 PDT 2024
---

Surprising nobody, one topic of conversation following my [post about power tools](/post/2024/the-power-tool-era-of-software/) was the environmental impact of generative models, and "are these new tools worth the cost?" is an entirely valid follow-up question. Running these models is incredibly expensive, with energy and water consumption numbers that boggle the mind—datacenters belonging to Google, Microsoft, and Meta consumed approximately 2.2×10⁹ m³ of water in 2022[^ai-water]!

That's 0.5% of the 444.4×10⁹ m³ consumed by the United States alone in 2020[^global-water], but people _need_ food and _don't need_, as one person put it, "bullshit factories". Which is true! I don't need "spicy autocomplete" to write code any more than I need a router to cut a rabbet, but both are useful and neither are going away. To continue with the metaphors: these new power tools are themselves in their steam power era.

Steam power is a nice label that helps historians[^thomas] avoid having to mention coal. The initial mechanization of all industries (including carpentry) came at such a high environmental cost that "a black form of the peppered moth rapidly took over in industrial parts of the UK during the 1800s, as soot blackened the tree trunks and walls of its habitat"[^peppered-moth].

The early days of the Industrial Revolution were _grim_, but there's not much coal left in today's industrial power mix—the UK is even on track to shut down their last plant this year[^uk-coal]. This has mostly been made possible by a combination of electrification and improved grid composition, and the impact has been significant. In 2020, 70.6% of domestically-produced steel in the United States was made by electric arc furnace[^steel] and 59% of California's electricity came from carbon-free sources[^cec]. Municipal utilities have started experimenting with providing high quality recycled water (or ["purple" water](https://www.valleywater.org/news-events/news-releases/recycled-water-runs-through-it-purple-pipe-system)), and renewable sources in Europe now regularly cause power production to exceed demand, resulting in negative electricity prices[^negative-energy].

There _is_ cause for optimism, and [it's important that we let ourselves feel that](https://kottke.org/24/08/hopefulness-is-the-warrior-emotion). If anything, it's inspiring that people's access to information today has improved so much that the costs of datacenters—which do not directly affect most people!—are such common knowledge; it only adds to the incentives pressuring them to improve.

[^ai-water]: Li, Pengfei et. al. [Making AI Less “Thirsty”: Uncovering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03271). _arXiv_, 6 Apr. 2023.
[^global-water]: Ritchie, Hannah, and Max Roser. [Water Use and Stress](https://ourworldindata.org/water-use-stress#:~:text=Freshwater%20withdrawals%20by%20country). _Our World in Data_, Feb. 2024.
[^tellme]: Tell me you didn't read the article without telling me you didn't etc.
[^thomas]: And kids shows like Thomas the Tank Engine.
[^peppered-moth]: Webb, Jonathan. [Famous Peppered Moth’s Dark Secret Revealed](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-36424768). _BBC News_, 1 June 2016.
[^uk-coal]: Calma, Justine. [The UK Helped Usher in the Coal Era — Now It’s Closing Its Last Remaining Plant](https://www.theverge.com/2024/9/23/24252195/last-coal-power-plant-close-climate-change-clean-energy). _The Verge_, 23 Sept. 2024
[^steel]: [Facts about American Steel Sustainability](https://www.steel.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/AISI_FactSheet_SteelSustainability-11-3-21.pdf). _American Iron and Steel Institute_.
[^cec]: [New Data Indicates California Remains ahead of Clean Electricity Goals](https://www.energy.ca.gov/news/2022-02/new-data-indicates-california-remains-ahead-clean-electricity-goals). _California Energy Commission_, 22 Feb. 2022.
[^negative-energy]: Bocca, Roberto. [Negative Energy Price Record in Europe, and Other Top Energy Stories](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/09/negative-energy-price-record-in-europe-and-other-top-energy-stories/). _World Economic Forum_, 23 Sept. 2024.

Commit message:

Support the metaphor a bit better by splitting out improvements driven by coal from improvements driven by more modern developments

post/2024/on-steam-power.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "On Steam Power"
description: "And why doomerism gets us nowhere."
published_at: Tue Sep 24 00:35:36 PDT 2024
---

Surprising nobody, one topic of conversation following my [post about power tools](/post/2024/the-power-tool-era-of-software/) was the environmental impact of generative models, and "are these new tools worth the cost?" is an entirely valid follow-up question. Running these models is incredibly expensive, with energy and water consumption numbers that boggle the mind—datacenters belonging to Google, Microsoft, and Meta consumed approximately 2.2×10⁹ m³ of water in 2022[^ai-water]!

That's 0.5% of the 444.4×10⁹ m³ consumed by the United States alone in 2020[^global-water], but people _need_ food and _don't need_, as one person put it, "bullshit factories". Which is true! I don't need "spicy autocomplete" to write code any more than I need a router to cut a rabbet, but both are useful and neither are going away. To continue with the metaphors: these new power tools are themselves in their steam power era.

Steam power is a nice label that helps historians[^thomas] avoid having to mention coal. The initial mechanization of all industries (including carpentry) came at such a high environmental cost that "a black form of the peppered moth rapidly took over in industrial parts of the UK during the 1800s, as soot blackened the tree trunks and walls of its habitat"[^peppered-moth].

The early days of the Industrial Revolution were _grim_, but there's not much coal left in today's industrial power mix—the UK is even on track to shut down their last plant this year[^uk-coal]. This has mostly been made possible by a combination of electrification and improved grid composition, and the impact has been significant. In 2020, 70.6% of domestically-produced steel in the United States was made by electric arc furnace[^steel] and 59% of California's electricity came from carbon-free sources[^cec].

Likewise there are already improvements happening today that directly map to modern datacenters. Within the past decade many municipal utilities have added high quality recycled water (or ["purple" water](https://www.valleywater.org/news-events/news-releases/recycled-water-runs-through-it-purple-pipe-system)) to their offerings, and renewable sources in Europe now regularly cause power production to exceed demand, resulting in negative electricity prices[^negative-energy].

There _is_ cause for optimism, and [it's important that we let ourselves feel that](https://kottke.org/24/08/hopefulness-is-the-warrior-emotion). If anything, it's inspiring that people's access to information today has improved so much that the costs of datacenters—which do not directly affect most people!—are such common knowledge; it only adds to the incentives pressuring them to improve.

[^ai-water]: Li, Pengfei et. al. [Making AI Less “Thirsty”: Uncovering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03271). _arXiv_, 6 Apr. 2023.
[^global-water]: Ritchie, Hannah, and Max Roser. [Water Use and Stress](https://ourworldindata.org/water-use-stress#:~:text=Freshwater%20withdrawals%20by%20country). _Our World in Data_, Feb. 2024.
[^tellme]: Tell me you didn't read the article without telling me you didn't etc.
[^thomas]: And kids' shows like Thomas the Tank Engine.
[^peppered-moth]: Webb, Jonathan. [Famous Peppered Moth’s Dark Secret Revealed](https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-36424768). _BBC News_, 1 June 2016.
[^uk-coal]: Calma, Justine. [The UK Helped Usher in the Coal Era — Now It’s Closing Its Last Remaining Plant](https://www.theverge.com/2024/9/23/24252195/last-coal-power-plant-close-climate-change-clean-energy). _The Verge_, 23 Sept. 2024
[^steel]: [Facts about American Steel Sustainability](https://www.steel.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/AISI_FactSheet_SteelSustainability-11-3-21.pdf). _American Iron and Steel Institute_.
[^cec]: [New Data Indicates California Remains ahead of Clean Electricity Goals](https://www.energy.ca.gov/news/2022-02/new-data-indicates-california-remains-ahead-clean-electricity-goals). _California Energy Commission_, 22 Feb. 2022.
[^negative-energy]: Bocca, Roberto. [Negative Energy Price Record in Europe, and Other Top Energy Stories](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/09/negative-energy-price-record-in-europe-and-other-top-energy-stories/). _World Economic Forum_, 23 Sept. 2024.
