index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: WELCOME TO SCOTT'S HOME PAGE
showtitle: false
---

Hi! I'm [Scott Perry](about), and this is where I write things that I might want to refer to later[^social]. There's a [blog](blog) component to it, but it's very much made to be explored[^garden].

The page I share most often is [What is Modern Monetary Theory?]({% post_url 2022-08-17-what-is-mmt %}) The most popular page is [`<!-- 🤦 -->`]({% post_url 2022-11-12-facepalm %}). You should subscribe to the [feed](/feed.xml) if you'd like to keep up with changes as they happen.

Broadly categorized, I enjoy writing about:

* [ideas](ideas)
* [stories](stories)
* [code](code) snippets, solutions to small problems I've had and ideas that have struck me
* [projects](projects) throughout their lifecycle
* [stuff I use](iusethis) that makes me happy (or not) in the hopes that it'll make you happy (or not?) too

[^social]: In contrast to [social media](/about/#fn:socials), where I write things that are forgettable
[^garden]: One might charitably call it a [digital garden](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history)

Commit message:

I didn't actually mean to commit changes to the index but since we're here anyway...

index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: WELCOME TO SCOTT'S HOME PAGE
showtitle: false
---

Hi! I'm [Scott Perry](about), and this is where I write things that I might want to refer to later[^social]. The page I share most often is [What is Modern Monetary Theory?]({% post_url 2022-08-17-what-is-mmt %}) Despite that, the most popular page is [`<!-- 🤦 -->`]({% post_url 2022-11-12-facepalm %}).

This site is made to be explored[^garden]; if you enjoy it, consider subscribing to the [feed](/feed.xml)—you can preview its contents [here](blog).

Broadly categorized, I enjoy writing about:

* [ideas](ideas)
* [stories](stories)
* [code](code) snippets, solutions to small problems I've had and ideas that have struck me
* [projects](projects) throughout their lifecycle
* [stuff I use](iusethis) that makes me happy (or not) in the hopes that it'll make you happy (or not?) too

[^social]: In contrast to [social media](/about/#fn:socials), where I write things that are forgettable
[^garden]: One might charitably call it a [digital garden](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history)
