projects.md, before:

---
layout: page
---

* I guess?
{:toc}

# Electronics

As a tinkerer, I like to fix things (or at least learn more about their insides) when they're broken. Like [reviving an electronic keyboard]({% post_url 2022-04-06-reviving-a-Yamaha-PSS-A50 %}) we got for our kid, or [replacing a worn contactor in my electric vehicle charger]({% post_url 2022-09-25-contactor-replacement %}).

A long time ago [I turned a Brother SX-4000 into a teletype](http://numist.net/post/2010/project-typewriter.html). Later, [I forced it to print all tweets that mentioned @Square]({% post_url 2013-09-30-square-tweetwriter %}). Finally, I shipped it off to Quebec to live out its days as an art project.<!-- TODO -->

# Fiber Arts

Having a sewing machine is like owning a welder. When Tanya wanted to make her wedding dress, I lobbied for a heavy duty machine so I could make stuff like [better motorcycle tie downs]({% post_url 2022-03-16-cargobuckle-mods %}). I also turned my high school backback into a hip bag recently but haven't written about it. The search for the perfect hip bag has been somewhat of an albatross for me.

# Software

There's a [whole page dedicated to smaller bits of code](/code), but I also have some larger ongoing projects that I either help out with or am responsible for, like [feedyour.email]({% post_url 2022-02-17-feedyour.email %}) (which turns newsletters into RSS feeds) and  [Switch](switch) (a window-based context switcher for macOS). Also, obviously, [this website](/colophon).

# Woodworking

My first significant project with the Shaper Origin was [a media center for my record player]({% post_url 2019-07-07-media-center %}), followed by a [travel ukulele]({% post_url 2022-04-21-travel-uke %}).

Commit message:

SV forks backpost with oldblog style link and a fix for the card on the blog list

projects.md, after:

---
layout: page
---

* I guess?
{:toc}

# Electronics

As a tinkerer, I like to fix things (or at least learn more about their insides) when they're broken. Like [reviving an electronic keyboard]({% post_url 2022-04-06-reviving-a-Yamaha-PSS-A50 %}) we got for our kid, or [replacing a worn contactor in my electric vehicle charger]({% post_url 2022-09-25-contactor-replacement %}).

A long time ago [I turned a Brother SX-4000 into a teletype](http://numist.net/post/2010/project-typewriter.html). Later, [I forced it to print all tweets that mentioned @Square]({% post_url 2013-09-30-square-tweetwriter %}). Finally, I shipped it off to Quebec to live out its days as an art project.<!-- TODO -->

# Fiber Arts

Having a sewing machine is like owning a welder. When Tanya wanted to make her wedding dress, I lobbied for a heavy duty machine so I could make stuff like [better motorcycle tie downs]({% post_url 2022-03-16-cargobuckle-mods %}). I also turned my high school backback into a hip bag recently but haven't written about it. The search for the perfect hip bag has been somewhat of an albatross for me.

# Motorcycle

A local mechanic and I figured out how to [fit GSX-R cartridges in the forks of a 2nd generation SV650]({% post_url 2010-09-25-svforks %}).

# Software

There's a [whole page dedicated to smaller bits of code](/code), but I also have some larger ongoing projects that I either help out with or am responsible for, like [feedyour.email]({% post_url 2022-02-17-feedyour.email %}) (which turns newsletters into RSS feeds) and  [Switch](switch) (a window-based context switcher for macOS). Also, obviously, [this website](/colophon).

# Woodworking

My first significant project with the Shaper Origin was [a media center for my record player]({% post_url 2019-07-07-media-center %}), followed by a [travel ukulele]({% post_url 2022-04-21-travel-uke %}).
