---
layout: post
title:  "Edna Lenora Perry (1923-2020)"
date:   2020-01-20 11:24:12 -0800
tags: [👤]
description: My paternal grandmother Edna Perry died on January 15th 2020 at the age of 96.
---

My paternal grandmother Edna Perry [died](http://www.mhs.mb.ca/docs/people/perry_el.shtml) on January 15th 2020 at the age of 96. The [service](https://cropo.com/tribute/details/7009/EDNA-PERRY/obituary.html) was five days later. All the sons—both born (John, Sheldon, and Keith) and effective (Peter, Tolv, and Bob)—attended and spoke. It seemed likely this will be their last reunion, making the funeral and interment all the more poignant. A long chapter of everyone's lives finally closed forever.

Her death was a surprise to those that expected her (highly heritable) stubbornness to get her all the way to 100—upon which she'd receive a [letter from the Queen](https://www.centralbedfordshire.gov.uk/info/34/hm_lord-lieutenant_of_bedfordshire_helen_nellis/256/anniversary_and_birthday_greetings_from_hm_the_queen), completing her bucket list—though by 96 she'd already lived a full life. Born in Winnipeg, she met my grandfather when he enlisted in the RAF and chased him around the world (or so I'm told) before they settled in Transcona. She was a teacher (later a principal) and minister, and they were both very active in their community. I only lived in the area between 1987-90 but whenever I was in town it was impossible to escape my surname.

I don't have many clear memories from before 1990, but I do remember visiting them at Elliot Rd after we'd moved away. My dad's brothers were themselves neighbours on the next street—all three houses connected by their backyards—so there was always something for a kid to do. Edna would knit or wrap hangers as they watched Peter Jennings every night, and they drank tea on a decidedly English schedule. She took hers with scalded milk, my grandather a teaspoon of sugar.

I don't remember exactly when she began suffering from macular degeneration, as far as I know we had always played canasta on a deck of cards with oversized legends, but we learned Braille together and occasionally exchanged letters. She had a Perkins Brailler, I made do with a slate and stylus. Every week my grandfather would read bible passages into a tape recorder for her to play back and memorize for her sermon. Later when email became a thing, she learned how to touch type, send/read email, and navigate a few other screens on her computer equipped with an early version of JAWS. Accessibility tech was extremely rudimentary back then (as were the operating systems) so we'd [call in my grandfather to help](https://twitter.com/numist/status/1473757657798348800) whenever she strayed out of familiar territory.

In her later years she even conscripted my father to coauthor an [autobiography](https://books.google.com/books/about/A_Prairie_Girl_s_Life_The_Story_of_The_R.html?id=d_oMCAAAQBAJ). He visited often, and worked tirelessly editing the manuscript in between trips.

Anyway, I recently came across this undated letter that she had typed (Courier bold!) and sent, and thought sharing it would be a good way to wrap up this post:

> Braille anyone?
> 
> Nearly 20 years, I became blind. The news that I would not be able to read the printed word again was traumatic for me. I was lost as with every turn in life I ran into the blank world of not being able to understand what was going on around me. What should I do?
> 
> My life up to this moment had been crowded with the visual. I was a Priest in the Anglican Church of Canada with the responsibility of a rural parish. How could I possibly keep up my obligations?
> 
> I had also been a School Principal, teaching Speed Reading to a separate group. I thought my life was shattered! What could I possibly do? I was offered braille by the Winnipeg CNIB. A wonderful teacher came out to my house every Friday. At last I had something to wrap my grain around. I was so thankful!
> 
> I was so fortunate in the fact that my husband supported me in all my ups and downs. We have 3 sons and supportive daughters-in-law.
> 
> Braille became my waking and nighttime thoughts. My 5 year old Grandson spent every Sunday afternoon with me. He was very quick to pick up on the fundamentals of the dot system. He was always one step ahead of me. When we came to the story of Louis Braille, he was as impressed ad I was to learn how that very courageous young man not only overcame his handicap, but made the lives of others more meaningful and productive.
> 
> Braille saved my sanity! It also gave me a purpose in life. I have tried to keep Louis Braille's wonderful example of courage and creativeness at the forefront of my vision.
> 
> Braille has been a beacon of light to so many. When I broke first my right wrist and the next year broke my other one, my grasp of the braille reading, wad slowly lost. I was blessed with the gift of another great teacher, who came out faithfully each, this time to teach me the use of the computer. Braille, however, has been the true toll that saved my sanity when I needed that light to pull me out of despair.
> 
> Thank you Louis Braille! Looking at the future however, I can not see that my use of braille will be prominent in my life. The electronic age offers so many other shortcuts. The impact of braille for so many of us will not be lost. The support of that fine organization, CNIB. Their support was heartwarming. My thanks to all.
> 
> Edna L. Perry<br />
> Apt 102, 216 Edison Avenue<br />
> Winnipeg, MB<br />
> R2G 4H7

